# Real-time Application Identity Fraud Detection
This project aimed at capturing fraudulent credit card applications with a supervised model using synthetic credit card application data collected between January 1, 2017 and December 31, 2017. The dataset includes synthetic PII (Personally Identifiable Information) fields specifically designed for identity fraud analysis. The final model can detect about 51% of all frauds in 3% of the population.

### Section 1. Data Quality Report
<b>\[File: DQR_IdentityFraud.ipynb\]</b>

There are 10 fields (2 numerical and 8 categorical) and 100,000 records. Among those, there are 4 fields with missing values or frivolous values. The overall fraudulent rate is 1.439%, which indicates the dataset is imbalanced. 

<b> Feature Description:</b>
1. record - Number of records (unique index)
2. date -  Application date
3. ssn - Social security number of the applicant
4. firstname - First name of the applicant
5. lastname - Last name of the applicant
6. address - Home Address of the applicant
7. zip5 - Zip code of the applicant
8. dob - Date of birth of the applicant
9. homephone - Home phone number of the applicant
10. fraud_label - Fraud label (flag)

### Section 2. Data Cleaning and Feature Engineering 
<b>\[File: Feature_Engineering_IdentityFraud.ipynb]</b>

Excluded outliers and filled missing or frivolous values with unique strings that include the record number of that application and number of leading zeros that help to format the final value. After transforming the frivolous fields, an incoming application will not appear to be overly risky when it has missing fields that are replaced by dummy placeholders. Created 3,958 variables (after deduplication) based on the applicant age, date of week,  number of days since an application with same entity has been seen, velocity, relative velovity, number of records with same entity over different intervals, and age indicators, using 32 entities generated by the original 10 features.

### Section 3. Feature Selection
<b>\[File: Feature_Selection_IdentityFraud.ipynb\]</b>

To reduce dimensionality and make the final model viable, I selected variables based on a univariate Kolmogorov–Smirnov statistic. Only the top 224 variables will be kept. After that, 25 of the 224 variables will be selected using the FDR score (What fraction of all the fraud can the model catch at a particular score cutoff) by LightGBM classifier and SequentialFeatureSelector.

### Section 4. Modeling
<b>\[File: Modeling_IdentityFraud.ipynb\]</b>

Split the dataset into a training set, test set, and out-of-time set (last 3 months' records), the out-of-time set is necessary because the last 3 months' pattern is abnormal. Using logistic regression as the benchmark, several different types of models are explored, including decision tree, random forest, boosting trees, and neural network. The final model is chosen mainly based on the performance on the out-of-time set, a LightGBM model is chosen. 

Recommended cutoff of 3% for balanced sensitivity and high customer aquisition, considering rejection of authentic applicant will encounter reduced loyalty and image.


